Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in today's video
we're going to look at the projective line and
metrical structure on it in a yet a different
way we're going to extend the understanding of
what geometry in this one-dimensional
setting means to include not just the
familiar euclidean kind of orientation but also
a relativistic orientation ultimately associated
with Einstein's theory of special relativity
okay it's very interesting story here and it's
a it really opens up our eyes I think to a lot
of new possibilities for what geometry is and
the various kinds of investigations that we can
make we have to be prepared that our intuition
that has been developed very steadily in
one direction is really only oriented in
one direction there are many other vistas where
things look quite different but ultimately just
as valid as the one that we're familiar with it's
a remarkable development in 20th century physics
the development of special relativity and then
general relativity and to a certain extent modern
pure mathematics hasn't really fully incorporated
this understanding of the physicists into the sort
of mathematical pure framework and one of the
reasons is that our reluctance to let go of the
real number dreaming forces us to stay within
a rather constrained a leeway when it comes to
thinking about the possibilities for geometry when
we let go of that real number dreaming we're no
longer anchored down or tied down to real numbers
we can think more generally and you'll see the
advantages very clearly in today's lecture ok so
we're talking about the ordinary projective line
with projective 1 points just proportions and
closed in square brackets as usual and here is
the Euclidean structure that we've talked about
quite a lot where you basically introduce a No
of projective quadrants into this situation
allowing you to assign a number to a pair of
lines and here's this standard formula and here's
an alternate formula for it okay and permanently
the denominators here involved these expressions
x1 squared + y1 squared we take the sum of the
squares of these two components and take products
of those and you might well ask well why do we do
that why don't we take the sum of the squares and
not say the difference between the squares or this
one squared minus 5 times that one squared the
main requirement that we do need is that the whole
expression be homogeneous but there's in fact
quite a lot of different ways of arranging that
homogeneity so why did we pick this particular one
out of the various possibilities that we we could
have had in front of us well you can argue and say
well this is the most simplest and that certainly
has some of the Lydda t but we'll see that this
alternate form here is really equally interesting
ok so this is a new kind of relativistic structure
as opposed to what we call a euclidean structure
over here ok this relativistic structure is
opposed by a new type of projective quadrants
so the quadrants between X 1 to Y 1 and X 2 to y
2 is minus x1 y2 minus x2 y1 squared all over X
1 squared minus y1 squared times X 2 squared
minus y2 squared it looks just like this one
except that there's minus signs down here and
there's also a minus sign out front now it'll
turn out as we'll see that the same expression
can also be written as 1 minus this expression x
1 x 2 minus y 1 y 2 squared over again the same
denominator X 1 squared minus y 1 squared times
X 2 squared minus y 2 squared so this kind of
situation over here we've already had a look at
some examples the kinds of projective quadrants is
that we get are things like four-fifths or 1/2 or
nine-tenths in this in this case here let's have
a look at the same lines the lines 3 1 1 2 and 1
2 minus 1 over here 3 2 1 1 2 2 1 2 minus 1 so the
objects themselves are the same just the way we're
going to measure their separation is different all
right so let's have a look at this new projective
quadrants between these 2 1 points between 3 1
and 1 2 well in this form here we would take the
X 1 Y 2 minus X 2 y 1 so 1 times 1 minus 2 times
3 so that's minus 5 and squared let me get 25 up
in the numerator there there's also a minus sign
here and then in the denominator we would get 1
squared minus 2 squared that says minus 3 and we
would also get 3 squared minus 1 squared which is
9 minus 1 is 8 so in the denominator here we get
a minus 3 and 1/8 the minus sign would cancel with
that minus sign and so we get 25 over 24 that is
the projective quadrants between these two lines
in this relativistic setting sometimes I refer to
this relativistic setting as red geometry in that
same context the familiar euclidean one is blue
geometry and that's an aspect of chromo geometry
which we are going to meet pretty soon what about
this other line here this is quite interesting the
one that's in red the line 1 2 minus 1 what's
the protective quadrants between this one and
this one well if you look at the expression you'll
see that there's a slight problem and the problem
is because when we look at this denominator here
this squared minus the squared is 0 so if this
line is involved and one of the factors down here
in the denominator is 0 so we're dividing by 0
which is not really allowed in our arithmetic
that means that projective quadrants between
any lie and this particular line is not defined
this is a new phenomena that's gonna play a very
important role in this relativistic setting and
really distinguishes it in a major way from the
usual familiar situation over here but in fact
is not all that much different from the phenomena
that we saw over here in an appropriate finite
field our formulas for the euclidean projective
quadrants relied heavily on a fabulous identity
which I called Fibonacci's identity but I also
suggested that it also goes back to Diophantus
about a millennium before Fibonacci and this was
the identity here and there's a variant of that
which is obtained from this one by replacing say
y1 with minus y1 which case this becomes a minus
sign this becomes a plus sign and the minus sign
here doesn't affect the right hand side so this is
a variant of Fibonacci's identity this one perhaps
is more familiar if you're thinking in the terms
of complex numbers represents the fact that the
quadrants of a product of two complex numbers is
the product of their quadrants so now I want you
to reduce a another variant of this identity which
we'll call the relativistic Fibonacci's identity
and here it is here it's different it's X 1 X 2
minus y 1 y 2 squared minus X 1 Y 2 minus X 2 y
1 squared equals x 1 squared minus y 1 squared
times X 2 squared minus y 2 squared okay it's an
exercise please check this directly by expanding
out both sides and just seeing that there's some
cancellation otherwise the same another way of
seeing this is to use a little bit of complex
number kind of thinking and to take the first
equation here and replace both y1 and y2 with
AI x y1 + I times y2 where I is some symbol that
satisfies I squared equals minus 1 if we replace
both of these with I times themselves then the
product of those two eyes is a minus sign the
eyes that appear here and here are common and
when we square that I will come out front with
a minus sign and the eye that we multiply this
thing with the gives us a minus sign and the
eye that we multiply this thing with gives us a
minus sign so algebraically this and this are just
related by a relatively simple change involving
this mysterious imaginary number I but you don't
need to think about eyes you can just think
of it as a purely rational identity that you
can just check directly by expanding out of both
sides and please do that to make sure that you've
checked this relativistic version of Fibonacci's
identity it's this identity that allows us to see
that we have these two forms of this relativistic
quadrants so one of them was obtained by looking
at minus this thing squared divided by the right
hand side so if you imagine dividing everything
by the right hand side then what are the terms
you're gonna get is minus this thing squared
divided by these two factors on the right hand
side you will have 1 and over here you'll have
this thing squared divided by this product so if
we want to get this thing by itself we can bring
this to the other side and so we see that minus
this thing squared divided by these two things
is 1 minus this thing squared over those 2 things
so that justifies that identity that I wrote down
on the previous slide when we introduced the
relativistic quadrants a remarkable aspect of
this relativistic geometry is that there are no
points something that we don't see in Euclidean
geometry over the rational numbers a null point
is a projective one point say a equals x 2y for
which x squared minus y squared is zero and
we've seen that if either a 1 or a 2 is null
then the quadrants between a 1 and a 2 is not
defined because a 0 ends up in the denominator
it's a basic fact that there are exactly two null
points namely 1 2 1 and 1/2 minus 1 it's a bit of
an exercise just to check for yourself that if you
have a null point that it's basically a multiple
of this one or multiple of this one these are the
only two null points that are around and visually
these null points are these two lines here in
red that prominently sort of a perpendicular
to each other in the usual sense but not in the
relativistic sense and they form this cross which
is a sort of a two-dimensional version of what
the physicists call the light-cone so in special
relativity the motion of photons is represented by
a light cone and this is sort of the 2-dimensional
or maybe even one-dimensional version of that
so it turns out this geometry is very very
important for physics for modern physics even this
one-dimensional situation has a major significance
to to physicists so quite an interesting new
aspect to this geometry the fact that there
are these two special lines in the geometry that
are sort of god-given and they are special let's
talk about perpendicularity in this relativistic
projective setting we denote perpendicularity with
this familiar symbol a 1 is perpendicular day 2
and how do we define that well I remind you that
in the Euclidian case perpendicularity between
two such points was defined in terms of their
quadrants being equal to 1 and that turned out
to be equivalent because of that second formula
for their projective quadrants to the condition
that X 1 X 2 plus y 1 y 2 equals 0 that's called
the dot product or the inner product between
these two vectors in two-dimensional geometry
so in the red or relativistic geometry that we're
talking about now we will proceed in a similar way
but we'll define a1 and a2 to be perpendicular
precisely when x1 x2 minus y1 y2 equals 0 this
is the relativistic version of this thing it's
kind of a relativistic dot product or inner
product that's floating around here so for example
the 1 points 1 2 3 and 3 2 1 are perpendicular
and written this way because 1 times 3 minus 3
times 1 is 0 it's pretty clear what the pattern
is whenever you have a 2 B & B 2 a then they are
going to be perpendicular ok as an exercise please
show that if you do have perpendicular points and
if the quadrants is defined then that quadrants
is necessarily equal to 1 so would be almost the
same as just using this as the definition except
that then the notion of perpendicularity wouldn't
apply to null points and it is useful to have the
notion of perpendicularity applied to null points
because of this next exercise that the null points
satisfy that they are perpendicular to themselves
so a plus is perpendicular to a plus and a minus
is perpendicular to a minus this is a foreign
concept in Euclidean geometry there's no such
thing as a vector perpendicular to itself unless
it's the zero vector but here we have these two
lines which are perpendicular to themselves this
relativistic geometry is exotic but surprisingly
important because our world the one that we live
in according to the modern physicists is actually
geometrically more relativistic that it is
Euclidean at least when you look at it in a very
large-scale point of view that's not so obvious to
us because we're relatively small and relatively
slow but sort of from a large-scale point of
view Einstein's special theory of relativity
explains what's going on geometrically better than
Euclidean geometry so there's much to be gained by
getting some experience even though this is just a
very modest relativistic geometry even under stony
is still a one-dimensional situation but it's the
one-dimensional situation which is sort of at the
core of a lot of higher dimensional relativistic
phenomena so if you're physicists this is a great
place to start learning some modern geometry so
let's have a look by staring at a few examples
say some lines line three to one the line 1 to
2 line 2 to minus 3 those are three lines we can
find quadrants --is between them just to see what
they look like and then here are the reference
null lines a plus and a minus we're not going
to use them to compute quadrants --is because
we know then we get denominators which are zero
which is not allowed okay the quadrants between
1 to 2 and 3 to 1 we've calculated that before
that's 25 over 24 the quadrants between 1 2 & 2
2 minus 3 ok let's use this form of things
so 1 minus the dot product 1 times 2 minus
2 times minus 3 all squared over 1 squared minus
2 squared times 2 squared minus -3 squared ok so
here there's a 2 plus 6 that's a total of 8 so
64 and over here we have a minus 3 and a minus
5 for total 15 so we have 1 minus 64 over 15
which is minus 49 over 15 and you can check
similarity that the quadrants between 3 2 1 & 2
2 minus 3 this one here is a hundred one over 40
okay now another exercise check that the spread
function which is basically the embodiment of the
projective triple quad formula applies to these
three numbers that these three numbers satisfy
the projective triple quad formula this is what we
would expect if we were in a Euclidean situation
and these were Euclidean projective kwanzas
but now it appears that at least in this case
these three also satisfy the projective triple
quad formula the exact same projective triple
quad formula no difference at all it's very
interesting and suggestive possibility so I
can't stress enough that if you're an amateur
mathematician and you're looking around for
something to investigate to make some discoveries
of your own this is a really great direction to
think about geometry in these different contexts
especially in a relativistic context this is a
situation which has unfortunately been a blind
spot for 20th century mathematics some people
have worked in this direction but not as many as
really should have either there really has been
all these opportunities of pushing geometry
forwards in a relativistic setting and I'm
talking about classical geometry not differential
geometry classical you know triangle geometry
circle geometry conic geometry and so on all
these things in a relativistic setting huge
opportunities so a good way of starting is to
use this opportunity right here to get familiar
with the essential workings of these kinds of
geometries and to do that I'm going to give
you some exercises so these are relatively routine
they basically follow similar patterns that we've
already talked about in the Euclidean case so
there's nothing conceptually too dramatically
different but it's very instructive to work your
way through them and it'd be surprising to you
that things were as pleasantly as they do you
ought to be surprised you have to be thinking
wow why hasn't anybody told me about this before
very good question well one of the reasons really
is because people haven't understood rational
trigonometry before okay it's a relatively new
development and it really underlies a lot of
this thinking that we can think rationally and
algebraically about a lot of things which formerly
people thought you needed analysis but you don't
need analysis just need algebra and the right
way of thinking ok so here's another exercise
show that in this read relativistic geometry any
projective quadrants q se has the property that
it's either less than or equal to zero or it's
greater than or equal to one this is assuming
we're working over the rational numbers so this
is exactly complementary to the situation in the
Euclidian situation in the Euclidian situation
a projective quadrants was always in the range
0 to 1 here in this red relativistic setting
it's exactly the complement of that it's quite
interesting the next exercise is suggested by
that previous example I want you to show that the
projective triple quad formula holes without any
alteration in this relativistic protective setting
and this result another exercise very important
very useful fact that if you have three numbers
q1 q2 and q3 which satisfy the projective triple
quad formula in other words s of them is 0 and
if one of them equals 1 say q3 equals 1 then
the other two sum to 1 so if you have three
numbers and one of them is 1 they satisfy the
triple quad formula the projective one then the
other to sum to 1 in particular if you have two
projective 1 points which are perpendicular then
any other one will form two quadrants 'iz which
sum to 1 so three very interesting and important
exercises all right so the basic philosophy is
that pretty well everything that's valid in the
Euclidean setting is likely to be valid in this
relativistic setting if we organize things the
right way if we look at things in the right way so
the rotations and reflections that we were talking
about in the Euclidean setting have analogs in
this relativistic setting and they become quite
important in relativistic physics okay so the
rotations first we'll denote them with exactly
the same kind of symbol a row they're labeled
also by a projective one points A to B and this
symbol is defined first of all just in terms of
its combination with a projective one point X
to Y so we just define this symbol in terms of
this product equaling this and this is in this
case a X plus B Y to be x plus a y exactly the
same as in the Euclidean setting except that
there's a plus sign there that first expression
rather than a minus sign and the reflections well
same kind of thing they're given by Sigma a to
be and the formula is very much the same as it
was in the Euclidian situation it's a X minus B
Y to be X minus a Y which is just the same as it
was in the Euclidean setting except that there's a
minus sign here where there used to be a plus sign
in matrix form you can think about
these as transformations as projective
transformations we'll talk about what that
means more precisely some future point but
in any case these two by two matrix
a B ba represents this relativistic
rotation and the relativistic reflection is
represented by the matrix a minus B B minus
a-and what did we do with our rotations in the
Acadian setting well we realized that we could
sort of compose them we could take a projective
one point and apply one rotation and then we can
apply another rotation to that and that turned
out to be what you go when you took the same
one point and applied a different rotation one
given by some knew one point which is in some
sense some combination of the two original 1
points so this defines a algebra structure on
the projective rotations and here's the
crucial way that we compose these things
and you can check this that a to B times C to D
is AC plus BD to ad plus BC very much like the
complex number story with a small difference
that there's a plus sign here and not a minus
sign so please check that this actually gives an
associative commutative multiplication which has
an identity the identity is 1 to 0 just as it
was before but it's not complex numbers so it's
some kind of analogue all the complex numbers
that's more suited for relativistic work so is
there such a thing well yes there is and it's
a quite useful for physicists so again we we
see we could have to expand our thinking in yet
another direction that not just complex numbers
around to help us in two-dimensional geometry but
also these well-read kind of complex numbers are
around to help us perhaps in red geometry in two
dimensions so very intriguing possibility sort of
in this direction suggested by this algebraic
structure in this one-dimensional relativistic
situation okay and now paralleling a result that
we had in the occluding setting is this theorem
that if a to b is a non-null projective point
which means that a squared plus b squared does
not equal zero then both row A to B and Sigma
a to b our ice sama trees what that means is
that if we have two projective one point say P
1 and P 2 and we take the quadrants between them
that's the same as what we get when we take the
quadrants between the two points that we get by
multiplying both of them by say row this being
row it's also the same as what we get when we
take the quadrants between what we get when we
multiply these two points both by Sigma that's
being Sigma there's a condition of being an
isometry and note that it's important in fact
to require this condition please investigate what
happens if a to B is a null point what does row A
to B and Sigma A to B do when you're multiplying
points by those something a little bit different
that we don't see in Euclidean geometry all right
so please prove this and and then then you can
construct an analogue of an exercise that we did
in the occluding case which is to list the various
multiplications that exist between the rows and
the Sigma's so row A to B times row C to D is row
AC plus BD to ad plus BC we've seen that formula
in the previous slide but you can also multiply a
row by a sigma or a sigma by row each case you
get a sigma and here are the various formulas
and you can also multiply two Sigma's and you
get a row and here's the corresponding formula
and these formulas are well worth staring at
they're kind of Pleasant and pretty and they
compare pleasantly with the formulas that we
got in the clinton case so whole new world of
potential geometry opening up here still just in
this one-dimensional case but the story really
isn't complete so I'm obliged to so close a circle
of ideas here by telling you that there's actually
a third geometry floating around and it's kind
of implicit in these formulas perhaps a little
bit so there's a third geometry floating around
here still in this one-dimensional situation
which is what I call the green geometry okay
and it's also another relativistic geometry
and sort of plays a complementary role to the
red relativistic geometry but the whole story
really sort of comes forth and comes really
alive when we think of all three geometries
together at the same time interacting when
we have our pizza with not just pepperoni
not just mushrooms but pepperoni mushrooms and
onions all at the same time a very rich meal
very satisfying for anybody with interest in
geometry so next time I'm going to introduce
you to another way of thinking about relativistic
geometry and this remarkable threefold symmetry
called chromo geometry I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening